# About the program

The program is my own implementation of chess in Java. Originally, I developed the game as a course assignment during my studies. The project underwent a lot of changes since then. A great deal of code has been refactored, since I intended to improve its readability and reduce its complexity.

The code takes advantage of some of more recent (Java 8+) features, namely:

* for each loops,
* Stream API,
* the `Optional` class
* generic functions,
* functional interfaces,
* the `var` keyword (local variable type inference),
* switch expressions.

# Code overview

The program consists of two packages: `my.chess` and `my.chess.pieces`.

`my.chess` package contains classes with the following functionalities:
* `MainFrame` — displays the window which contains the menu bar and the board; contains the `main` method. 
* `Board` — displays the board, processes player’s input, enforces game rules.
* `Square` — represents a single board square, containing a piece.
* `Coord` — a pair of constant row and column coordinates, indicating a square’s position in the board.
* `Move` — records player's move.
* `Save` — used for saving and loading games via serialization and deserialization, respectively.

`my.chess.pieces` contains classes with the following functionalities:
* `PieceImageLoader` — loads images used for displaying pieces on the board. The class adheres to the singleton design pattern. Access to its instance is restricted to the package.
* `Piece` — an abstract class representing a piece. Each successor is required to overwrite the abstract `isCorrectMovement` method, which defines movement constraints for the piece. 
* `Rook`, `Pawn`, `King`, `Queen`, `Bishop`, `Knight` — concrete implementations of the `Piece` class, representing respective chess pieces. 
* `Empty` — in order to simplify code and make the program less error-prone, empty squares cannot hold `null` values (which is enforced by Lombok’s `@NonNull` annotation). Instead, an instance of `Empty` class is used (null object pattern).

User interface was developed with the help of Swing library and NetBeans IDE. The code written in `initComponents` function in `MainFrame` class has been generated by NetBeans’ GUI editor.

GUI strings are included in English and Polish versions in respective `bundle.properties` files — there are no hardcoded strings.

# Areas of improvement

Currently, it’s only possible to play against a human opponent. An AI could be implemented to allow single-player gameplay.

# Installation

Java 15 is required to use the application. The project is built with Apache Maven. The repository includes the required `pom.xml` file. Download the repository and run `mvn install` inside the project’s main directory. To launch the game, go to `target` folder and run `java -jar Chess-1.0-jar-with-dependencies.jar`.

# Usage

After launching the game, you can start playing immediately. First off, select the piece you want to move with the mouse. It will be highlighted. Point to any desired spot. The piece will be moved, provided all conditions are met; otherwise, a message will appear, stating the reason why the move is illegal. Capturing works the same way. When you're done with the move, it’s next player’s turn, who plays with black pieces. 

You can save (or load previously saved) game at any point. To do that, click the “Game” menu, and select “Save Game” or “Load Game“. A dialog window will appear, prompting you to select a save.


